Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization.
Using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent,
and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today, we invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the Gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you. Friends, we come now to this wonderful Feast of Corpus Christi. You know, every year we have the Feast of Trinity Sunday, followed by Corpus Christi. So two of the highest feasts.
is theological mysteries, the Trinity and the Eucharist back to back. And I think the church is right in sort of compelling us every year to come back to these great
great truth because in some ways the heart of the spiritual life is here. So last week we looked at the mystery of the Trinity, now at the body and blood of Jesus. And the reason
And the readings, of course, are marvelous. I want to start, though, with reading number two. It's from 1 Corinthians, and it's a very brief passage, but wow, is it packed with theological.
Geological importance. It's now the Apostle Paul. So we're talking very early on. He's writing this sometime in the 50s of the first century. We're within 500 years.
20 years or so of the dying and rising of Jesus.
And Paul, you know, who met the risen Lord is communicating something of great significance. So here's what he says.
First of all, I receive from the Lord.
But what I also handed on to you, that's interesting because Paul will talk about receiving something from, you know, the other apostles and so on.
No, no, no. This he received, he said, from the Lord. Right?
what?
That Jesus, on the night he was handed over, took bread, and after he had given thanks, broke it and said,
This is my body
That is for you.
In the same way also the cop after supper, saying,
This cup is the new covenant in my blood.
Do this as often as you drink it in remembrance.
Of me.
Okay, familiar words from the Eucharist, of course, but now keep in mind who's speaking and how...
How primitive this is in the tradition, how early in the tradition.
Paul is communicating something that he thinks is of central importance.
Also keep in mind,
Who's speaking here? Paul, the apostle, who had been
Rabbi Shaul
from Tarsus who came to Jerusalem.
to study at the feet of Gamaliel, one of the greatest rabbis of the time.
Shaul was immersed in the traditions of his people.
He would have,
lived and worked somewhere in the vicinity of the Jerusalem Temple.
We're
Sacrifice took place year-round.
Paul knew that whole world, the scriptures, the liturgy and practice of Judaism.
1. This is the one who says, Remember us from the Lord. 2.
This is my body that is for you.
Now, you're a Jew who is acquainted with the temple liturgy.
And language now is being used about a body offered.
What does he have in mind?
He hasn't mined temple sacrifice.
When someone would bring the body of an animal
to the temple.
As a offering.
It could be an offering of thanksgiving. It could be a sin offering, an offering of reparation.
You'd bring the animal to the temple.
1975, presented to the priest.
The throat would be slashed and the blood would pour out into bowls.
Then the animal, depending on the type of sacrifice, was either burnt or burnt.
Whole in a whole of cost
Or was partially burned, and the rest given for a meal.
That's the world that Paul, Rabbi Shaul lived in.
Where this took place all the time.
If they say you could smell the temple before you saw it as you were approaching, because it smelled like a slaughterhouse and a barbecue put together, I suppose. Yeah.
The animal sacrifice was the stuff
It was the lifeblood of the temple.
Well, let's go on now.
He's remembering what Jesus did the night before he died.
In the same way also the cup
After supper saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood."
The blood of the animal poured out
What was happening there but the great covenant with Israel was being renewed.
Think of when the covenant was cut with Abraham, the covenant with Noah, the covenant with Moses, the covenant with David. They're all accompanied by
Bye.
Blood sacrifice
And the idea was very clear that
The blood represented
The outpouring of a person's life.
My life blood, Lord, I'm offering to you.
And I'm saying,
What's happening to this animal
If by right should be happening to me, what?
I'm seeing in this animal a representation of my own sinful nature.
And, and, and,
As the animal is being put to death, it's as though I'm being punished for my sins. My life blood poured out.
In that great act, the covenants with Israel are being ratified and renewed.
That's what was in the mind of an Israelite coming to the temple.
Now, I want to take one more step here.
with all this imagery in mind, seeing which Rabbi Shaul knew very well as he's recalling what Jesus did.
On the highest of the holy days, Yom Kippur,
It's a day of atonement.
The high priest would go into the Holy of Holies of the temple, right? And he would sacrifice an animal.
He would sprinkle the blood of the animal around the holy of holies. That's that old idea of the lifeblood of the people being poured out, of their sins being,
Yeah.
Acknowledged.
But then see, he would catch some of that blood in a bowl.
He would then,
Exit the holy of holies
Through the veil,
The one that we know as Christians was torn at the death of Jesus. It's very important, isn't it?
he'd come out through that veil.
And then he would sprinkle the blood.
on the people.
That's an echo, too, remember in the book of Exodus, when Moses does that, they sprinkle the blood on the altar and then on the people. Yeah.
"'The idea there was, yes, the people are pouring out their lifeblood, "'but so is God.'"
God is offering his life
In love and forgiveness for his people.
All of this, the sea of trouble is, and even for us Catholics, that we use the language of temple and sacrifice and altar and priesthood.
But this is the world it's coming out of.
This vividly, vividly experienced
Sacrificing of animals, offering of a body, pouring out of blood.
The animal representing sin, the blood of God.
being poured out on the people, all of that, all of that.
is in the back and front of Paul's mind.
as he recalls what Jesus did.
Okay, now let's focus in on
Jesus.
This is my body.
Offered for you
This is my blood.
poured out for you.
This happens everybody.
On the altar of the cross.
What's happening on that cross? You say, well, it's a Roman execution. Yeah, it is then.
Oh, no, no, no, but they saw us. He was much deeper. Yeah.
Vision.
What's happening in that cross?
Jesus liked the sacrifice lamb
is taking upon himself.
the sin of the world. The lamb is innocent, that's brought to the altar, but the lamb becomes a symbolic bearer of the world.
Of the sins of the one who offers it.
So Jesus willingly
Becomes the lamb of sacrifice
Who bears the sins, not just of one sacrifice.
But the sins of the whole world.
He becomes their representative before God.
Now,
No.
Please don't misunderstand something here.
Don't read this as God is this, you know, kind of like alcoholic, dysfunctional father that's so offended he requires the bloody sacrifice of his son before him.
And before his anger is quelled, he says,
That's emotionalizing all this.
Rather see Jesus
I'm the cross.
Offering his body, pouring out his blood.
As the one who willingly became, what did John the Baptist call him, the Lamb of God.
The lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.
We are meant to see in the suffering of Jesus.
What by right should be happening to us? That's the point.
That's the point.
That's why every Mass, when this sacrifice is re-presented,
We join our lives to that sacrifice. We're saying, Lord, in your blood poured out, I see what by right should be happening to me. I
I see my sin.
poured out, punished, acknowledged.
Take it further step
Yes, Jesus on the cross is the lamb offered for our sins.
But now,
That blood poured out
Is also the blood
that was offered on Yom Kippur.
When the high priest comes out through the veil and sprinkles the people with blood,
That's God's life blood.
Of forgiveness and compassion
Being poured out on the sinful world.
And now, Jen, go back to that wonderful place.
It's a puzzling reference. As Jesus dies, the curtain in the temple is torn in two from top to bottom. That's the veil. The idea is not the high...
The high priest, the human figure, the high priest. Now, now.
It's Jesus, the true high priest,
coming out from the Holy of Holies, sprinkling,
All of us sinners
55 with the blood of the 5,00
Of his life and his compassion his forgiveness
That's what's happening on the cross.
What Jesus did the night before he died, Paul is saying.
Was a great anticipation of this moment.
The body and blood of Jesus, therefore, that we celebrate today,
The body and blood of Jesus have become present to us every Mass.
Is our participation anew?
In this magnificent moment.
Of acknowledging our sin
and receiving the forgiveness of God.
Okay, one last step, and I'm just going to make a brief reference to the gospel. It's wonderful, though, what the church does. It gives us all this Pauline, wonderful, sacrificial language. But then, for...
1. For the Gospel reading. 2.
We get Luke's version of the multiplication of the loaves and fishes. So we know the story well. It's giant crowds just down. They want to be fed. And what do we have? And Jesus said,
Jesus said, well, tell me, what do you have? And oh, just these little provisions. Well, give them to me. And he multiplies them unto the feeding of the whole crowd. Right.
Okay.
I mentioned this a few minutes ago.
Some sacrifices,
in the temple were holocausts. So you kill the animal, the blood's poured out, and then the animal would be wholly consumed by flame.
But there were other sacrifices where?
The animal was killed, blood poured out, part of the animal was offered as a holocaust.
And the rest of the animal
Was shared as a meal.
Ah.
What do we say about the body and blood of Jesus? It is all of the sacrificial reality.
Yes, the sacrifice of the Mass. Yes, indeed.
But we also speak of the Mass as a great meal.
We're now we're invited to the table
It's an altar, yes, but it's also a table to which we're invited. Right.
Not just so that the blood of Jesus might be sprinkled on us as in the old covenant.
but that we might eat the body and drink the blood of the sacrificed Christ.
That we're given the privilege now of
100% of imbibing of
And consuming
This great
Sacrificial offering
The mass is
A sacrifice
The mass is also a
meal
I don't just witness the sacrifice of Jesus. I don't just take it in and acknowledge it.
i.
Consume it.
I consume it so it becomes bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh. I become
One with Jesus.
I don't know, friends, how you can say this without falling into kind of a mystical situation.
Um,
Reverie.
Of what's happening at the mass,
What's happening?
As we commune with the body and blood of Jesus.
We take his sacrifice.
Into our own lives.
We become conformed to it.
And we begin to live. Now, remember what I said last week about the Trinity.
Now we begin to live
It's the very inner life of God.
That's what's at stake.
as we celebrate the body and the blood of Jesus.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron.
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.